[general]
name=TopoTrail
qgisMinimumVersion=3.22
qgisMaximumVersion=4.99
description=Topographic suitability, access zones and least-cost routes for preliminary trail and field planning, from a single DEM.
version=1.1.1
author=MACIEL, L. S. C.
email=herpetomantiqueira@gmail.com
homepage=https://github.com/LuanCortesM/Topotrail#readme
tracker=https://github.com/LuanCortesM/Topotrail/issues
repository=https://github.com/LuanCortesM/Topotrail
category=Raster
tags=trails,accessibility,protected areas,multicriteria analysis,slope,curvature,DEM,GIS,QGIS,least cost path
icon=logo.png
about=TopoTrail is a QGIS plugin designed to support preliminary planning of new trails, access routes and field corridors in natural areas and protected areas. The tool models topographic suitability using a Digital Elevation Model, slope, curvature, relative topographic risk, suitability classes, potential access zones, suggested least-cost routes and access corridors. The plugin does not automatically detect roads, pastures, existing trails, land cover, hydrography or legal restrictions; these layers should be used as complementary evidence in QGIS. No external Python dependencies: it uses only NumPy, SciPy and GDAL/OGR, which every QGIS installation already ships. Developed by Luan da Silva Cortes Maciel (MACIEL, L. S. C.) as a product of his master's research in Biodiversity in Protected Areas, associated with the Escola Nacional de Botanica Tropical and Jardim Botanico do Rio de Janeiro, under the supervision of Leandro Freitas. Associated project: Herpeto Mantiqueira.
license=MIT
experimental=False
deprecated=False
hasProcessingProvider=True
changelog=1.1.1 - Release hygiene for the QGIS plugin repository: its Bandit scan blocked 1.1.0 for eight try/except/pass blocks; every swallowed exception now leaves a trace in the QGIS message log, unused imports were pruned, and the same Bandit and Flake8 scans run in CI so this cannot happen again. metadata.txt no longer contains percent signs, which the repository's parser rejects. No functional change.
    1.1.0 - Graded river crossings. Not every watercourse is impassable: many trails ford shallow streams or cross on stones. The route now pays a cost that grows with the size of the stream, using the contributing area of the channel as a proxy for its size (hydraulic geometry, Leopold and Maddock 1953; Faustini et al. 2009): headwater streams below 2 km2 cost 2x, streams 2-10 km2 cost 4x, small rivers up to the fordable ceiling cost 8x, and above the ceiling (new parameter 'Largest fordable drainage basin', default 50 km2) the river is a barrier. Zones still exclude the drainage strip. Every crossing the route makes is written to a new output layer of points with contributing area, class, cost factor and a field-check warning, and is loaded into the project with the other products. The DEM knows the size of the basin, not today's depth or current, so the safety of a crossing is never asserted -- it is listed to be verified.
    1.0.0 - First stable release. End-to-end battery on three regions with very different relief -- Serra da Mantiqueira (real 1-arcsecond DEM, the Marins-Marinzinho-Itaguare traverse against the hiker's own GPS track and summit waypoints), Ceara (real Copernicus GLO-90, field GPS tracks, park polygon) and a Himalayan slope regime -- plus polar latitude, Web Mercator and memory-layer cases: 14 of 14 pass, and the full window was driven as a user would in all six languages. The battery found one real problem, fixed here: with the window's defaults, watercourses derived from the DEM entered the route as an absolute wall, so any traverse that had to cross a valley failed with 'could not connect'. Watercourses are now always a cost for the route (crossable at 8x) while zones still exclude them in 'avoid' mode; the user's own constraint layer keeps the chosen mode. The no-path error now lists the likely causes. Docs: docs/BATERIA_TESTES.md, validation/bateria_regioes.py.
    0.14.0 - Three independent adversarial audits (mathematics, geography, languages) before publication, and the fixes they demanded. Mathematics: cells next to NoData were differentiated against the scene mean, which invented slopes of hundreds of percent along every reprojected DEM's edge -- derivatives now use one-sided differences at the data edge (slope, curvature, VRM, TWI); criteria that do not cover a cell (extra raster, wetness, roughness) no longer count as the worst score but are left out with per-cell weight renormalisation; the stream buffer is circular; curvatures are now correctly cited (Moore et al. 1991 / Mitasova and Hofierka 1993, not Zevenbergen-Thorne); degenerate rasters get a clear message. Geography: DEMs in a projected CRS that does not measure in metres (State Plane feet, Web Mercator) are reprojected to the automatic UTM instead of being read as metres; rotated or rectangular-pixel grids are resampled to a square north-up grid; constraint layers come through QGIS features, so GeoPackage layers opened from the browser and memory layers work; custom output CRSs (USER:nnnn, no authority) work through WKT; the cell of a point is found with floor, not round; a point outside the DEM says so; UTM zone is right for 0-360 longitudes and a warning covers latitudes above 84; KML explains it is always WGS84; rasters inside a GeoPackage are accepted. Languages: the Processing help text, the step-4 summary, the map-pick prompts, file-dialog titles and filters, the layer names loaded into the project and the not-registered error were still Portuguese or English in the other languages -- all keyed now; combo boxes resize with the language; switching language no longer resets the cost model; locale strings like zh.UTF-8 detect correctly; the Chinese entry says Simplified; translation fixes in es, fr, zh, ja from a fluent review. Nineteen regression tests added.
    0.13.1 - Interface pass. Qt silently ignores fractional pixel font sizes, and seventeen of the window's type rules used them, so most text was rendering at the QGIS default instead of the designed scale; every size is now a whole pixel and the hierarchy finally reads as drawn. Header is one row shorter (About and version join the step row). Included products no longer look disabled: accent icon, dashed frame and an "Included" pill. Four form labels and one group subtitle that were written once at build time now follow the language switch, and the Qt6 harness checks that nothing stays behind in another language.
    0.13.0 - Zero external dependencies. Every remaining use of geopandas and shapely (zone vectorisation, vector export, route and corridor construction) now goes through GDAL/OGR, which QGIS itself ships on every platform: install the plugin and it runs, with nothing to pip install. Verified end to end in a headless QGIS with geopandas, shapely, pandas, fiona and pyproj blocked from import, in GeoPackage, Shapefile and KML, on projected and geographic DEMs. Along the way, KML export switched to the LIBKML driver, because the classic KML driver silently dropped every attribute but the first two. A new test forbids any module-level import that QGIS does not guarantee, so this cannot regress.
    0.12.2 - Publication-readiness audit, and the start of its most serious finding: the plugin imported geopandas at module level, which QGIS does not ship on any platform, so it failed to load on a clean QGIS install before showing a single window. The constraint layer now goes through OGR, which QGIS does guarantee; the remaining call sites follow. Also removed a 902-line module no import ever reached.
    0.12.1 - The window is now actually built and exercised under Qt6 -- the toolkit QGIS 4 uses -- in all six languages, and that found a break the static check had missed: QPainter.Antialiasing is also a scoped enum in Qt6. The harness runs in continuous integration from now on, so QGIS 4 support stops being an assumption.
    0.12.0 - QGIS 4 compatibility, verified rather than assumed. The plugin already declared support for QGIS 4, but Qt6 removed unscoped enum access -- Qt.PointingHandCursor no longer exists -- and 33 such accesses would have raised as soon as a user clicked. All of them now go through the version-agnostic helpers the project already had, and a test resolves every enum name against a real PyQt6 install, which catches a mistyped group that Qt5 would silently tolerate. The footer now credits the author alongside the institutional logos, in all six languages.
    0.11.2 - Layout fixes found by measuring every label in all six languages: no text is clipped any more. The clipping was in the Latin languages, not the Asian ones -- "Destination" needed 98 px in a slot fixed at 64, and the active step tab reserved its width in the normal font weight while rendering in semibold, so it cut the step the user was actually on. A test now checks all six languages at the minimum window size, because this defect is silent.
    0.11.1 - Audit fixes. The transitability class labels are now translated as well: they are written into the output raster's legend, so a Japanese user was opening the map in QGIS and reading a Portuguese legend -- and the file kept it when passed on. Also removed an interface file the rewritten window no longer loads, an unused widget class, and a stray run log, all of which were shipping inside the plugin package.
    0.11.0 - The plugin now speaks six languages: Portuguese, English, Spanish, French, Chinese and Japanese. It opens in the language QGIS is running in and remembers a different choice. The strings moved out of the Python source into one JSON file per language, so a wrong term can be fixed by whoever speaks the language rather than by whoever maintains the code, and the Processing toolbox labels went through the same mechanism -- they previously stayed in Portuguese in every language, because the Qt .qm files they relied on were never generated. Spanish, French, Chinese and Japanese are draft translations and say so in the interface; corrections are welcome.
    0.10.0 - The window was restructured around a horizontal stepper instead of a sidebar, freeing the full width for content, and it now follows the QGIS theme in light or dark with a manual override. Choosing a DEM shows what was actually read from it -- format, cell size, CRS and pixel count -- so a wrong file is caught before the analysis runs rather than after. Outputs that are always produced now say so with the word "included" instead of a ticked-and-greyed checkbox that read as switched off, option cards answer Space and Enter, and the footer carries a contextual line saying what is missing or what is selected.
    0.9.2 - A visual design pass. The plugin now has its own icon language: eighteen glyphs stroked with QPainter at the exact size and colour requested, so they stay sharp at any screen density and recolour with the state of the control, with no image files and no new dependency. Each output is presented as a selectable card with icon, title and one-line description instead of a checkbox in a list, so the screen can be scanned rather than read; the longer caveats moved into tooltips. Type scale, spacing and states were rebuilt around the deep forest green of the plugin's own logo.
    0.9.1 - Visual redesign of the assistant, around a sidebar in the deep forest green of the plugin's own logo, with the project and institutional logos restored to permanent view rather than hidden in an About box. Help texts no longer illustrate features with one country's place names: a tool published for worldwide use has to explain intermediate destinations as "one summit, then another", not by naming local peaks. Tests now fail the build if a regional example or a missing credit creeps back in.
    0.9.0 - The interface was rewritten as a four-step assistant. It had fallen behind the engine: sixteen parameters added since 0.6 -- deriving slope and curvature from the DEM, drainage, Tobler walking time, transitability breaks, intermediate destinations -- could not be reached from the window at all, and the transitability map was never loaded into the project because the dialog looked for an output name that never existed. Now only the DEM is required, every control carries a sentence explaining what it changes, options appear only when asked for, and the run happens in the background so QGIS stays usable. A contract test now fails the build whenever the window and the algorithm drift apart again.
    0.8.0 - Routes can now visit several destinations in order -- climb one summit, then the next, then descend -- instead of only a start and an end point, with optional exact optimisation of the visiting order. This closed the one case where the plugin lost to a straight line: declaring the three summits of the Marins-Itaguare traverse moved agreement with the real GPS track from 2.7 percent to 73.0 percent and median deviation from 1860 m to 114 m. Route constants were also recalibrated against route geometry rather than walking speed, which is what they actually govern: Tobler's published decay of 3.5 is confirmed, the terrain term is worth 12 points of agreement, and leave-one-out cross-validation showed the apparently better values do not generalise, so the defaults stand -- now on evidence.
    0.7.0 - First empirical validation against real field GPS: 110 h and 224 km of surveyed tracks in two biomes. Tobler's walking speed is optimistic by a factor of 1.7-3.1 for field survey work, but the route is provably unaffected -- only the estimated duration changes -- while the decay, which does move the route, could not be separated from its published value and is kept. Transitability labels no longer claim a walker cannot pass: real teams walked 115.8 percent slope. The class map now records the cell size and warns when it is coarse, because the same terrain reads as 48 percent or 76 percent walkable depending on resolution. Full record in docs/VALIDACAO.md.
    0.6.3 - Any raster the user has can now enter the model as an extra weighted criterion -- stoniness, vegetation cover, a cost surface -- aligned to the DEM grid and normalised by scene percentiles. Weighted zero by default.
    0.6.2 - New output: a transitability class map with absolute, field-meaningful classes and a colour palette written into the GeoTIFF, so it opens legible in QGIS with its legend. Slope sets the class; high ruggedness or high wetness push a cell one class worse; constraints marked as avoided become class 5.
    0.6.1 - Route cost can be estimated walking time using Tobler's anisotropic hiking function, so uphill and downhill no longer cost the same and the accumulated cost is in hours. Two optional criteria added, both derived from the DEM and both weighted zero by default: topographic wetness index and terrain ruggedness index. Fixes the reprojection fill entering the analysis as sea-level terrain.
    0.6.0 - Only the DEM is required: slope and both curvatures are derived from it by default, which removes the unit, sign-convention, grid-alignment and coverage problems in one step. Slope unit and DEM vertical unit are now explicit parameters. Watercourses can be extracted from the DEM and used as a constraint, and any vector layer can be used the same way. Route cost model is selectable. Potential zones now use the multicriteria model by default. Temporary directories are cleaned up.
    0.5.1 - QGIS 4 / Qt6 compatibility while preserving QGIS 3.22+ support; responsive interface for small screens and high-DPI scaling; theme-aware styling; experimental flag removed; interface text encoding corrected.
    0.5.0 - English documentation promoted to primary; Portuguese reference copies kept in docs/pt_BR; PT-BR | ENG language switch; legacy helper code removed; suitability, relative-risk, route and corridor workflow preserved.
    0.4.0 - Initial public beta.
